doc/driver-model/migration.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+

Migration Schedule
==================

U-Boot has been migrating to a new driver model since its introduction in
2014. This file describes the schedule for deprecation of pre-driver-model
features.

CONFIG_DM_MMC
-------------

* Status: In progress
* Deadline: 2019.04

The subsystem itself has been converted and maintainers should submit patches
switching over to using CONFIG_DM_MMC and other base driver model options in
time for inclusion in the 2019.04 rerelease.

CONFIG_DM_USB
-------------

* Status: In progress
* Deadline: 2019.07

The subsystem itself has been converted along with many of the host controller
and maintainers should submit patches switching over to using CONFIG_DM_USB and
other base driver model options in time for inclusion in the 2019.07 rerelease.

CONFIG_SATA
-----------

* Status: In progress
* Deadline: 2019.07

The subsystem itself has been converted along with many of the host controller
and maintainers should submit patches switching over to using CONFIG_AHCI and
other base driver model options in time for inclusion in the 2019.07 rerelease.

CONFIG_BLK
----------

* Status: In progress
* Deadline: 2019.07

In concert with maintainers migrating their block device usage to the
appropriate DM driver, CONFIG_BLK needs to be set as well.  The final deadline
here coincides with the final deadline for migration of the various block
subsystems.  At this point we will be able to audit and correct the logic in
Kconfig around using CONFIG_PARTITIONS and CONFIG_HAVE_BLOCK_DEVICE and make
use of CONFIG_BLK / CONFIG_SPL_BLK as needed.

CONFIG_DM_SPI / CONFIG_DM_SPI_FLASH
-----------------------------------

Board Maintainers should submit the patches for enabling DM_SPI and DM_SPI_FLASH
to move the migration with in the deadline.

No dm conversion yet::

	drivers/spi/fsl_espi.c
	drivers/spi/lpc32xx_ssp.c
	drivers/spi/sh_spi.c
	drivers/spi/soft_spi_legacy.c

* Status: In progress
* Deadline: 2019.04

Partially converted::

	drivers/spi/davinci_spi.c
	drivers/spi/fsl_dspi.c
	drivers/spi/kirkwood_spi.c
	drivers/spi/mxc_spi.c
	drivers/spi/mxs_spi.c
	drivers/spi/omap3_spi.c
	drivers/spi/sh_qspi.c

* Status: In progress
* Deadline: 2019.07


CONFIG_DM_PCI
-------------
Deadline: 2019.07

The PCI subsystem has supported driver model since mid 2015. Maintainers should
submit patches switching over to using CONFIG_DM_PCI and other base driver
model options in time for inclusion in the 2019.07 release.


CONFIG_DM_VIDEO
---------------
Deadline: 2019.07

The video subsystem has supported driver model since early 2016. Maintainers
should submit patches switching over to using CONFIG_DM_VIDEO and other base
driver model options in time for inclusion in the 2019.07 release.

CONFIG_DM_ETH
-------------
Deadline: 2020.07

The network subsystem has supported the driver model since early 2015.
Maintainers should submit patches switching over to using CONFIG_DM_ETH and
other base driver model options in time for inclusion in the 2020.07 release.

Commit message:

dm: MIGRATION: Add migration plan for CONFIG_DM
For many sub-systems we already require the driver model to be used. Yet
there is still a handful of boards that do not have CONFIG_DM enabled.

We should make CONFIG_DM compulsory with release v2020.01

Conversion dates for CONFIG_DM_SPL and CONFIG_DM_TPL are yet to be defined.

Signed-off-by: Heinrich Schuchardt <xypron.glpk@gmx.de>
Reviewed-by: Simon Glass <sjg@chromium.org>

doc/driver-model/migration.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+

Migration Schedule
==================

U-Boot has been migrating to a new driver model since its introduction in
2014. This file describes the schedule for deprecation of pre-driver-model
features.

CONFIG_DM
---------

* Status: In progress
* Deadline: 2020.01

Starting with the 2010.01 release CONFIG_DM will be enabled for all boards.
This does not concern CONFIG_DM_SPL and CONFIG_DM_TPL. The conversion date for
these configuration items still needs to be defined.

CONFIG_DM_MMC
-------------

* Status: In progress
* Deadline: 2019.04

The subsystem itself has been converted and maintainers should submit patches
switching over to using CONFIG_DM_MMC and other base driver model options in
time for inclusion in the 2019.04 rerelease.

CONFIG_DM_USB
-------------

* Status: In progress
* Deadline: 2019.07

The subsystem itself has been converted along with many of the host controller
and maintainers should submit patches switching over to using CONFIG_DM_USB and
other base driver model options in time for inclusion in the 2019.07 rerelease.

CONFIG_SATA
-----------

* Status: In progress
* Deadline: 2019.07

The subsystem itself has been converted along with many of the host controller
and maintainers should submit patches switching over to using CONFIG_AHCI and
other base driver model options in time for inclusion in the 2019.07 rerelease.

CONFIG_BLK
----------

* Status: In progress
* Deadline: 2019.07

In concert with maintainers migrating their block device usage to the
appropriate DM driver, CONFIG_BLK needs to be set as well.  The final deadline
here coincides with the final deadline for migration of the various block
subsystems.  At this point we will be able to audit and correct the logic in
Kconfig around using CONFIG_PARTITIONS and CONFIG_HAVE_BLOCK_DEVICE and make
use of CONFIG_BLK / CONFIG_SPL_BLK as needed.

CONFIG_DM_SPI / CONFIG_DM_SPI_FLASH
-----------------------------------

Board Maintainers should submit the patches for enabling DM_SPI and DM_SPI_FLASH
to move the migration with in the deadline.

No dm conversion yet::

	drivers/spi/fsl_espi.c
	drivers/spi/lpc32xx_ssp.c
	drivers/spi/sh_spi.c
	drivers/spi/soft_spi_legacy.c

* Status: In progress
* Deadline: 2019.04

Partially converted::

	drivers/spi/davinci_spi.c
	drivers/spi/fsl_dspi.c
	drivers/spi/kirkwood_spi.c
	drivers/spi/mxc_spi.c
	drivers/spi/mxs_spi.c
	drivers/spi/omap3_spi.c
	drivers/spi/sh_qspi.c

* Status: In progress
* Deadline: 2019.07


CONFIG_DM_PCI
-------------
Deadline: 2019.07

The PCI subsystem has supported driver model since mid 2015. Maintainers should
submit patches switching over to using CONFIG_DM_PCI and other base driver
model options in time for inclusion in the 2019.07 release.


CONFIG_DM_VIDEO
---------------
Deadline: 2019.07

The video subsystem has supported driver model since early 2016. Maintainers
should submit patches switching over to using CONFIG_DM_VIDEO and other base
driver model options in time for inclusion in the 2019.07 release.

CONFIG_DM_ETH
-------------
Deadline: 2020.07

The network subsystem has supported the driver model since early 2015.
Maintainers should submit patches switching over to using CONFIG_DM_ETH and
other base driver model options in time for inclusion in the 2020.07 release.
